README.md, before:

# Deploy-Whisper-On-GCP
In this example, I will document the steps to deploy the open AI whisper SOTA STT model on GCP cloud run with Docker. 

This is useful incase you want to ensure your data is stored on specific servers you are in control of. 

## IMPORTANT NOTES
- You will need to request GPU access from GCP which can take up to 2 days for approval in order to deploy using GPU on cloud run. (ADD STEPS ON HOW TO DO THIS FIRST)
- Inference using the different whisper models on CPU, will be extremely slow, and basically not useful for most cases


## Steps

### Create new python venv
    ```
    pyenv local 3.10.0

    python -m venv venv

    source venv/bin/activate
    ```

### Install the whisper package (need to read through source code, to verify if data is being stored, and check if it can run offline)
    ```
    pip install --upgrade pip
    
    pip install -U openai-whisper

    ```

### Install FFMPEG
I already have it installed, and this is just for running the model locally, we will need to install ffmpeg within our env container as well. 

```
# From Open AI Docs: 

# on Ubuntu or Debian
sudo apt update && sudo apt install ffmpeg

# on Arch Linux
sudo pacman -S ffmpeg

# on MacOS using Homebrew (https://brew.sh/)
brew install ffmpeg

# on Windows using Chocolatey (https://chocolatey.org/)
choco install ffmpeg

# on Windows using Scoop (https://scoop.sh/)
scoop install ffmpeg
```

### Additional Installs 
Read the docs from Open AI, as they suggest you may need to install the Rust programming language as well as packages like tiktoken; however, this will depend on your machine. For this demo, I am running locally on MacOS. 

### Test 
Grab any audio file with speech, to test the model locally using the CLI tool: 
```
whisper 'your_audio.mp3' --model turbo -f "json"
```
This will save your transcription data into a json file in the current dir. 

## Writing the API
First I will start by making a simple endpoint which is only used to upload audio and check the file name and its length in bytes. 

### Install Fast API
```
pip install fastapi 

pip install uvicorn 

# required for file uploading with fast API (Why?)
python-multipart
```

### Python API Endpoint
For loading the audio into our API, we will utlize the fast API upload file method: https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/reference/uploadfile/ 


```python
# API file upload code:
from fastapi import FastAPI, File, UploadFile
import subprocess


def check_ffmpeg():
    try:
        subprocess.run(
            ["ffmpeg", "-version"],
            capture_output=True,
            text=True,
            check=True
        )
        return True
    except subprocess.CalledProcessError:
        return False
    except FileNotFoundError:
        return False


app = FastAPI()


@app.post("/upload-audio/")
async def create_upload_file(file: UploadFile = File(...)):
    content = await file.read()
    response = {
        "filename": file.filename, 
        "content_size": len(content),
        "ffmpeg": check_ffmpeg()
    }
    return response
```

Check the api locally in development mode: 
```
fastapi dev main.py
```

Navigate to this URL to check out your API:
```
http://127.0.0.1:8000/docs
```

Next click on the "try it out" button. 

Then go to the file upload, and upload an MP3 file, and hit the "Execute" button. 

This will make a request to the API, the output should be something like so:

```json
{
  "filename": "your_audio.mp3",
  "content_size": 724320,
  "ffmpeg": true
}
```

## STT Python Code
Now that we verified that a simple API is working locally, lets add the STT python code from the example on the open AIs GitHub and add it to the API. 

```python
import whisper
from fastapi import FastAPI, File, UploadFile
import tempfile
import shutil
import os


def save_upload_file_to_temp(upload_file: UploadFile) -> str:
    with tempfile.NamedTemporaryFile(delete=False) as temp_file:
        upload_file.file.seek(0)
        shutil.copyfileobj(upload_file.file, temp_file)
        temp_file_path = temp_file.name
    return temp_file_path


app = FastAPI()
MODEL = whisper.load_model("turbo")


@app.post("/translate/")
async def translate(file: UploadFile = File(...)):
    temp_filepath = save_upload_file_to_temp(file)
    audio = whisper.load_audio(temp_filepath)  # Returns np.array
    audio = whisper.pad_or_trim(audio)  # Fixes np.array shape
    # make log-Mel spectrogram and move to the same device as the model
    mel = whisper.log_mel_spectrogram(audio, n_mels=128).to(MODEL.device)
    options = whisper.DecodingOptions()  # This is empty, but a required param.
    result = whisper.decode(MODEL, mel, options)
    os.remove(temp_filepath)
    return {"text": result.text, "language": result.language}
```

How this works: 

## Testing with Docker Locally
### Create the docker file

### Build the docker image
```
docker build -t my-fastapi-app .

docker run -p 8080:8080 my-fastapi-app --name my-fastapi-container

# View the API now running within docker and test it again:
http://localhost:8080/docs

# Incase you want to delete the container, run:
docker rm -f /my-fastapi-container
```

## Deploying on Cloud Run

### Adding GPU Checks
Before deploying onto cloud run, I want to add a helper function, which can be used to validate if the GPU is connected and working.

```python
@app.post("/check-gpu/")
async def check_gpu():
    if not torch.cuda.is_available():
        raise HTTPException(status_code=400, detail="CUDA is not available")
    return {"cuda": True}
```

### Deploy without GPU first (GitHub Actions)

There is a premade GitHub actions which can be used to deploy Cloud Run, which I would normally use; however, since cloud run with GPU on cloud run is a relatively feature, it is not yet supported with GitHub workflow. Therefore, this requires us to build the docker image and push the image to the artifact registry in GCP, through the GCP SDK. To Do this, we can use GitHub actions to run automated deployment scripts.

Deploy on cloud run can be somewhat involved, as it requires:
- Service accounts
- GitHub secrets
- Setting budget alerts
I have documented all these steps already in this repo: 
https://github.com/fentresspaul61B/Deploy-API-with-Large-Files-GCP-Cloud-Run

For the sake of brevity I will include the steps required, and not touch on the ones that are not required (like setting budget alerts). However, 

I suggest to eventually add budget alerts, as using APIs on GCP can lead to unexpected bills when mistakes are made, leading to large bills, and this is compounded by the fact we are also adding a GPU server instance. 

### Create new service account
Add these permissions:

| **Role Name**                     | **Description**                                                                                                             |
|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Storage Object Viewer**         |    Grants access to agent to download and list items in a bucket.                                                           |
| **Service Account User**          |    Required for deploying to Cloud Run; allows the deploying service account to act as the runtime service account.         |
| **Cloud Run Developer**           |    Grants the agent access to deploy the API to Google Cloud Run.                                                           |
| **Artifact Registry Create-on-Push Writer**      |    Used to create an artifact, which is the stored Docker image in GCP.                                                     |

Create a new GitHub actions secret and name it: GCP_CREDENTIALS
Also add your GCP project ID: and name it GCP_PROJECT_ID.

### Checking CPU response times

Grab token from gcloud
```
gcloud auth print-identity-token
```

Navigate to postman:
- Switch the setting to "POST"
- Change to the form data
- Change to value to "file"
- Add the key to be "file"
- Then select to upload a test file
- Add token to bearer token
- Send

Also can check GPU and FFMPEG endpoints

There will be a long cold start time, as the model will take a while to load each time. 

### Creating GitHub Actions Workflow for deployment
https://cloud.google.com/run/docs/configuring/services/gpu#gcloud

- Go to cloud run admin API
- Go to Quotas and system limits
- Search for "Total Nvidia L4 GPU allocation, per project per region" and find your region
- Click the box
- Hit edit
- Fill out the request information

Otherwise you will get this error: 
```
ERROR: (gcloud.beta.run.deploy) spec.template.spec.node_selector: This project must be allowed to access instances with attached GPU. Please request the GPU access by requesting a quota via your cloud console.
```

Commit message:

Just got email confirmation that GPU access was granted, going to give it a try.

README.md, after:

# Deploy-Whisper-On-GCP
In this example, I will document the steps to deploy the open AI whisper SOTA STT model on GCP cloud run with Docker. 

This is useful incase you want to ensure your data is stored on specific servers you are in control of. 

## IMPORTANT NOTES
- You will need to request GPU access from GCP which can take up to 2 days for approval in order to deploy using GPU on cloud run. (ADD STEPS ON HOW TO DO THIS FIRST). For me this took about 4 businesses days. With that being said, GCP was very responsive, and gave me a status update almost every day which was helpful.
- Inference using the different whisper models on CPU, will be extremely slow, and basically not useful for most cases


## Steps

### Create new python venv
    ```
    pyenv local 3.10.0

    python -m venv venv

    source venv/bin/activate
    ```

### Install the whisper package (need to read through source code, to verify if data is being stored, and check if it can run offline)
    ```
    pip install --upgrade pip
    
    pip install -U openai-whisper

    ```

### Install FFMPEG
I already have it installed, and this is just for running the model locally, we will need to install ffmpeg within our env container as well. 

```
# From Open AI Docs: 

# on Ubuntu or Debian
sudo apt update && sudo apt install ffmpeg

# on Arch Linux
sudo pacman -S ffmpeg

# on MacOS using Homebrew (https://brew.sh/)
brew install ffmpeg

# on Windows using Chocolatey (https://chocolatey.org/)
choco install ffmpeg

# on Windows using Scoop (https://scoop.sh/)
scoop install ffmpeg
```

### Additional Installs 
Read the docs from Open AI, as they suggest you may need to install the Rust programming language as well as packages like tiktoken; however, this will depend on your machine. For this demo, I am running locally on MacOS. 

### Test 
Grab any audio file with speech, to test the model locally using the CLI tool: 
```
whisper 'your_audio.mp3' --model turbo -f "json"
```
This will save your transcription data into a json file in the current dir. 

## Writing the API
First I will start by making a simple endpoint which is only used to upload audio and check the file name and its length in bytes. 

### Install Fast API
```
pip install fastapi 

pip install uvicorn 

# required for file uploading with fast API (Why?)
python-multipart
```

### Python API Endpoint
For loading the audio into our API, we will utlize the fast API upload file method: https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/reference/uploadfile/ 


```python
# API file upload code:
from fastapi import FastAPI, File, UploadFile
import subprocess


def check_ffmpeg():
    try:
        subprocess.run(
            ["ffmpeg", "-version"],
            capture_output=True,
            text=True,
            check=True
        )
        return True
    except subprocess.CalledProcessError:
        return False
    except FileNotFoundError:
        return False


app = FastAPI()


@app.post("/upload-audio/")
async def create_upload_file(file: UploadFile = File(...)):
    content = await file.read()
    response = {
        "filename": file.filename, 
        "content_size": len(content),
        "ffmpeg": check_ffmpeg()
    }
    return response
```

Check the api locally in development mode: 
```
fastapi dev main.py
```

Navigate to this URL to check out your API:
```
http://127.0.0.1:8000/docs
```

Next click on the "try it out" button. 

Then go to the file upload, and upload an MP3 file, and hit the "Execute" button. 

This will make a request to the API, the output should be something like so:

```json
{
  "filename": "your_audio.mp3",
  "content_size": 724320,
  "ffmpeg": true
}
```

## STT Python Code
Now that we verified that a simple API is working locally, lets add the STT python code from the example on the open AIs GitHub and add it to the API. 

```python
import whisper
from fastapi import FastAPI, File, UploadFile
import tempfile
import shutil
import os


def save_upload_file_to_temp(upload_file: UploadFile) -> str:
    with tempfile.NamedTemporaryFile(delete=False) as temp_file:
        upload_file.file.seek(0)
        shutil.copyfileobj(upload_file.file, temp_file)
        temp_file_path = temp_file.name
    return temp_file_path


app = FastAPI()
MODEL = whisper.load_model("turbo")


@app.post("/translate/")
async def translate(file: UploadFile = File(...)):
    temp_filepath = save_upload_file_to_temp(file)
    audio = whisper.load_audio(temp_filepath)  # Returns np.array
    audio = whisper.pad_or_trim(audio)  # Fixes np.array shape
    # make log-Mel spectrogram and move to the same device as the model
    mel = whisper.log_mel_spectrogram(audio, n_mels=128).to(MODEL.device)
    options = whisper.DecodingOptions()  # This is empty, but a required param.
    result = whisper.decode(MODEL, mel, options)
    os.remove(temp_filepath)
    return {"text": result.text, "language": result.language}
```

How this works: 

## Testing with Docker Locally
### Create the docker file

### Build the docker image
```
docker build -t my-fastapi-app .

docker run -p 8080:8080 my-fastapi-app --name my-fastapi-container

# View the API now running within docker and test it again:
http://localhost:8080/docs

# Incase you want to delete the container, run:
docker rm -f /my-fastapi-container
```

## Deploying on Cloud Run

### Adding GPU Checks
Before deploying onto cloud run, I want to add a helper function, which can be used to validate if the GPU is connected and working.

```python
@app.post("/check-gpu/")
async def check_gpu():
    if not torch.cuda.is_available():
        raise HTTPException(status_code=400, detail="CUDA is not available")
    return {"cuda": True}
```

### Deploy without GPU first (GitHub Actions)

There is a premade GitHub actions which can be used to deploy Cloud Run, which I would normally use; however, since cloud run with GPU on cloud run is a relatively feature, it is not yet supported with GitHub workflow. Therefore, this requires us to build the docker image and push the image to the artifact registry in GCP, through the GCP SDK. To Do this, we can use GitHub actions to run automated deployment scripts.

Deploy on cloud run can be somewhat involved, as it requires:
- Service accounts
- GitHub secrets
- Setting budget alerts
I have documented all these steps already in this repo: 
https://github.com/fentresspaul61B/Deploy-API-with-Large-Files-GCP-Cloud-Run

For the sake of brevity I will include the steps required, and not touch on the ones that are not required (like setting budget alerts). However, 

I suggest to eventually add budget alerts, as using APIs on GCP can lead to unexpected bills when mistakes are made, leading to large bills, and this is compounded by the fact we are also adding a GPU server instance. 

### Create new service account
Add these permissions:

| **Role Name**                     | **Description**                                                                                                             |
|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Storage Object Viewer**         |    Grants access to agent to download and list items in a bucket.                                                           |
| **Service Account User**          |    Required for deploying to Cloud Run; allows the deploying service account to act as the runtime service account.         |
| **Cloud Run Developer**           |    Grants the agent access to deploy the API to Google Cloud Run.                                                           |
| **Artifact Registry Create-on-Push Writer**      |    Used to create an artifact, which is the stored Docker image in GCP.                                                     |

Create a new GitHub actions secret and name it: GCP_CREDENTIALS
Also add your GCP project ID: and name it GCP_PROJECT_ID.

### Checking CPU response times

Grab token from gcloud
```
gcloud auth print-identity-token
```

Navigate to postman:
- Switch the setting to "POST"
- Change to the form data
- Change to value to "file"
- Add the key to be "file"
- Then select to upload a test file
- Add token to bearer token
- Send

Also can check GPU and FFMPEG endpoints

There will be a long cold start time, as the model will take a while to load each time. 

### Creating GitHub Actions Workflow for deployment
https://cloud.google.com/run/docs/configuring/services/gpu#gcloud

- Go to cloud run admin API
- Go to Quotas and system limits
- Search for "Total Nvidia L4 GPU allocation, per project per region" and find your region
- Click the box
- Hit edit
- Fill out the request information

Otherwise you will get this error: 
```
ERROR: (gcloud.beta.run.deploy) spec.template.spec.node_selector: This project must be allowed to access instances with attached GPU. Please request the GPU access by requesting a quota via your cloud console.
```
